FORENSIC DETECTION OF AI WATERMARK REMOVAL: SYNTHETIC ATTACK
GENERALIZATION AND THE REAL-WORLD TOOL GAP
A Progress Report (Draft)

Status: Work in progress. This draft covers all completed work through the
Gap 1 real-tool evaluation. Gap 1 is reported as OPEN/UNRESOLVED (see
Section 6) -- this is a finding of the work, not a placeholder.

Update (2026-10-04): the checkpoint underlying this draft's original
headline number (checkpoints_v2_accum_long/best_model.pt, trained on MPS)
was lost from disk and had to be retrained to prepare this draft for
submission. A 3-seed retrain on different hardware (CUDA, not MPS) gives a
materially different, generally stronger result (AUROC 0.763 +/- 0.012
vs. the original single run's 0.662) and could not reproduce the original
run's specific training trajectory. This is documented as a new finding,
not silently patched over -- see Section 5.3.1 for the full account and
Section 5.8 for a from-scratch baseline comparison run on the same
retrained checkpoint's data. Sections 5.2 and 5.4 are left as the
historical record of analyses performed on the original MPS-trained run
and are flagged inline where they are superseded.


ABSTRACT

We study whether a forensic image classifier trained to distinguish
"watermark present" from "watermark successfully removed" can be built
honestly on synthetic attack data, and whether such a classifier's skill
generalizes to real, independently-authored watermark-removal tools. We
embed an invisible watermark via a DWT-DCT-SVD scheme, construct a labeled
dataset using verification-based (not construction-based) ground truth to
avoid a format/label leak we identify in an earlier iteration of this
pipeline, and train a ConvNeXt-Tiny classifier on a 900-image corpus
attacked by two structurally different families: a self-implemented
distortion-optimization attack (inspired by, but independent from, the
UnMarker paper) and a diffusion-autoencoder regeneration attack (SANA-VAE /
DC-AE). We isolate and rule out a batch-size training confound via matched
optimizer-step-count gradient accumulation, and find an AUROC gap from an
earlier single-attack baseline (0.888 vs. a 3-seed mean of 0.763 +/- 0.012
on retrain, originally measured as a single-run 0.662 before a hardware
change forced a retrain -- Section 5.3.1) attributable at least in part to
attack-family diversity, not the batch-size confound. We report full
standalone metrics for the retrained model across 3 seeds, including a
replicated bias toward misclassifying intact watermarks as "removed," and
a low-false-positive operating point reported honestly at the nearest
achievable false-positive rate given a 50-negative test set, rather than
interpolated. Finally, we attempt Gap 1 -- evaluating this classifier
against real, publicly released watermark-removal tools rather than our own
attack-family reimplementations -- and report that this remains unresolved:
every candidate tool investigated (DiffPure, the released UnMarker tool,
remove-ai-watermarks, Synthid-Bypass) was disqualified or impractical under
this project's compute constraints at the time (CPU/MPS-only). A later
renewed attempt on since-acquired CUDA hardware was started but stalled
mid-download and remains incomplete (Section 6.4). We treat Gap 1 as an
open, honestly-reported limitation rather than a completed result.


1. INTRODUCTION

Invisible image watermarking is increasingly proposed as a provenance
signal for AI-generated content. A natural forensic question follows: if a
watermark is removed, can a classifier trained on examples of "successful
removal" detect that removal occurred, independent of knowing which
specific removal method was used? We decompose this question into two
sub-problems, which we refer to throughout as Gap 1 and Gap 2:

  Gap 1 (generalization to real tools): A classifier trained on our own
  synthetic attack pipeline -- does it retain any skill against a
  watermark-removal tool it never saw during training, built and released
  independently by a third party?

  Gap 2 (removal-residue specificity): Is the classifier detecting residue
  specific to watermark removal, or merely detecting generic AI-editing /
  regeneration artifacts that would appear in any edited image, watermarked
  or not?

This report documents the pipeline built to study both questions, the
training and evaluation work completed to date, and a first attempt at Gap
1. Gap 2 is addressed only partially, via a control comparison described in
Section 5.5; it is not the primary subject of this draft and remains future
work in its own right.

A recurring methodological stance in this project is to report negative
and inconclusive results explicitly rather than only the results that
support a clean narrative. Two such results anchor this draft: a declining
control-task AUROC trend that resists a tidy explanation (Section 5.5), and
Gap 1 itself, which produced zero real-tool evidence despite a genuine
attempt (Section 6).


1.1 RELATED WORK

Three bodies of prior work bound this project: (i) invisible watermark
embedding schemes, including the specific scheme we build on; (ii) attacks
that remove or forge such watermarks; and (iii) forensic classifiers for
AI-generated/edited image detection, whose train/test generalization-gap
methodology this project's Gap 1 is a direct instance of.

Watermark embedding. The DWT-DCT-SVD embedding scheme used throughout this
project (Section 2) follows the hybrid wavelet/singular-value approach
introduced by Lai and Tsai (2010), who showed that perturbing a block's
dominant singular value after a DWT+DCT decomposition survives common
signal-processing operations without visible distortion; our use of this
scheme is a direct, non-learned instantiation of that approach rather than
a novel contribution in itself. More recent work roots watermarks directly
in a generative model rather than post-hoc into its output: Fernandez et
al.'s Stable Signature (ICCV 2023) fine-tunes a latent diffusion decoder so
every image it generates natively carries a recoverable signature, and Wen
et al.'s Tree-Ring Watermarks (NeurIPS 2023) embeds a pattern into the
initial diffusion sampling noise itself. Neither applies directly to our
setting -- both assume control over the generative model at image-creation
time, whereas our watermark is embedded post-hoc into existing photographs
-- but they represent the direction the field is moving toward partly
because post-hoc schemes like ours are more vulnerable to exactly the
regeneration-style attacks this project studies.

Watermark removal attacks. Zhao et al. (2023/NeurIPS 2024) formalize
regeneration attacks -- noising an image's embedding and reconstructing it
through a generative model -- as a general-purpose, largely
watermark-agnostic removal strategy, and report that this family
outperforms earlier geometric/signal-processing attacks across four
pixel-level watermarking schemes; our SANA-VAE / DC-AE attack (Section 3.1)
is an independent instantiation of this same regeneration-attack family
rather than a reimplementation of their specific pipeline. An et al.'s
WAVES benchmark (ICML 2024) standardizes stress-testing of watermark
robustness across traditional, adversarial, and regeneration-style attacks
and is the closest prior work, methodologically, to this project's
attack-family comparison in Section 5.4 -- though WAVES scores watermark
survival directly via the embedding scheme's own detector, whereas we
additionally train and evaluate a learned forensic classifier on top of
that signal. UnMarker (Kassis and Hengartner, IEEE S&P 2025) and WMForger
(Soucek et al., NeurIPS 2025) are discussed in Section 3 as the direct
basis for, respectively, our distortion-optimization attack and the
forging-attack family we set aside as out of scope.

Forensic detection of AI-generated/edited images. This project's classifier
(Section 4) and Gap 1 (Section 6) sit inside a longer-running forensics
line distinguishing "real" from "generated/manipulated" images rather than
verifying a specific watermark. Wang et al. (CVPR 2020) showed that a
classifier trained on one GAN family (ProGAN) can generalize surprisingly
well to unseen GAN architectures under the right augmentation choices -- an
early positive result for exactly the kind of cross-family generalization
this project's Gap 1 tests, but for GANs rather than watermark-removal
tools. Corvi et al. (ICASSP 2023) extended this line to diffusion-generated
images, finding diffusion models leave distinct, detectable spectral
fingerprints, but that detectors trained on GAN artifacts do not
automatically transfer to them. Ojha et al. (CVPR 2023) go further, showing
that classifiers explicitly trained for real-vs-fake classification
generalize poorly to generative-model families unseen during training, and
propose using a frozen, non-finetuned vision-language feature space instead
of a trained classifier to close that gap. Our Gap 1 is this same
cross-family generalization question, posed one level removed: not "was
this image generated by a model unseen during training" but "was this
image's watermark removed by a tool unseen during training" -- and Ojha et
al.'s negative result for the analogous generation-detection problem is a
reason to treat our own inability to close Gap 1 (Section 6) as plausible
rather than as a project-specific failure.


2. WATERMARKING SCHEME

We embed a synthetic binary watermark using a DWT-DCT-SVD scheme: the image
is decomposed via a 2-level discrete wavelet transform; within the
resulting low-frequency (LL) subband, the image is partitioned into 8x8
blocks; each block is DCT-transformed and its top singular value S[0] is
scaled by (1 + alpha * sign) according to the corresponding watermark bit.
Watermark presence is verified by extracting the same statistic from a
candidate image (given the true original) and correlating it against the
known watermark pattern; a correlation above a fixed threshold (0.5) is
read as "watermark present."

Embedding parameters used throughout the current dataset: alpha = 0.02,
block_size = 8, dwt_level = 2, watermark_seed = 42, verify_threshold = 0.5,
image size 224x224. Note alpha = 0.02 is deliberately weak relative to an
earlier baseline run (alpha = 0.1, Section 4); this is discussed as a
source of embedding fragility in Section 5.6.


3. DATASET CONSTRUCTION

3.1 Source images and attack pipeline

900 real photographs (DIV2K) are used as source images. Each is watermarked,
then attacked by exactly one of two families, drawn at random with nominal
fractions 0.5 / 0.5 (realized draw: 462 distortion-optimization, 438
SANA-VAE), followed by a mandatory JPEG-80 re-encode applied identically to
every attack path (no attack-specific exception):

  - distortion-optimization (src/attacks/distortion_optimization.py): a
    project-original implementation, inspired by but not derived from the
    released UnMarker tool (Kassis & Hengartner, IEEE S&P 2025), which we
    could not use directly (Section 6.1). Greedy, zeroth-order (gradient-
    free) search over DWT-LL block DC coefficients, targeting our own
    verifier directly, bounded by an L-infinity pixel budget.

  - SANA-VAE / DC-AE regeneration (src/attacks/diffusion_regen.py): an
    encode/decode roundtrip through a pretrained deep compression
    autoencoder (mit-han-lab/dc-ae-f32c32-sana-1.0-diffusers, Apache-2.0),
    following Xie et al., ICLR 2025 (Oral). Chosen over the alternatives
    evaluated (Section 3.3) for being CPU-capable with a permissive
    license and a documented single-image API.

3.2 Verification-based labeling (fixing an earlier label leak)

An earlier iteration of this pipeline assigned labels by construction (an
image was labeled "removed" simply because it came from the attack branch
of the code), which produced a fake 1.0 accuracy classifier that had
learned a format artifact rather than any removal signal. The current
pipeline instead re-extracts and re-verifies the watermark from every
attacked-and-JPEG-re-encoded image against the true original and assigns
the label from that verification outcome, not from which code branch
produced the image. This is applied identically across all attack families,
with no separate labeling rule per attack type.

Realized class balance on the full 900-image build: 399 "present" (label 0)
/ 501 "removed" (label 1). Per-family survival after the mandatory JPEG-80
re-encode: distortion-optimization removed the watermark in 375/462 (81.2%)
of attacked images; SANA-VAE removed it in only 126/438 (28.8%) -- markedly
weaker against this watermark scheme than our own targeted attack, a result
discussed further in Section 5.4.

3.3 Attack-family candidates considered but not used in the training
    pipeline

  - DiffPure (Nie et al., ICML 2022): disqualified -- non-commercial
    license, Docker + CUDA 11.0 requirement, ~32GB GPU memory, and a
    benchmark-only interface with no single-image CLI.
  - CtrlRegen (Liu et al., arXiv:2410.05470): integrated and available
    (~9.8GB, CPU-capable at ~24 min/image), but its source repository has
    no LICENSE file, which we flag as a reproducibility/redistribution
    concern; not used for the full 900-image build for this reason plus
    its CPU runtime cost at scale.
  - WMForger (Soucek et al., NeurIPS 2025, Spotlight): a watermark-forging
    (not watermark-removing) tool; out of scope, set aside without further
    evaluation.
  - The released UnMarker tool: disqualified (Section 6.1); this is why a
    project-original, UnMarker-inspired reimplementation was built instead.

3.4 Splits and leakage control

A source-image leakage audit found that a naive random/stratified split
could place the same source image's watermarked and removed variants across
different splits, in effect leaking the training signal about the specific
image (not just the general removal signal) into the test set. We rebuilt
build_splits.py to be group-aware by source image (group id = the
DIV2K filename shared by every derivative of that image, verified to
produce zero cross-split group overlap) before training on the current
dataset.

Resulting splits (data/splits_v2/):

  Split   n     present (0)   removed (1)
  train   600   279           321
  val     150   68            82
  test    150   52            98

A separate control split (data/splits_v2/test_task1_control.csv, n=196,
98/98 balanced) supports the Gap-2-adjacent control comparison described in
Section 5.5: it pairs the 98 verified "removed" test images against 98
images drawn from a parallel, never-watermarked control corpus subjected to
matched-severity degradation, so that a classifier relying only on generic
edit/degradation artifacts (rather than removal-specific residue) would be
expected to score near chance on this comparison.


4. CLASSIFIER AND TRAINING

Architecture: ConvNeXt-Tiny (timm, ImageNet-pretrained backbone,
global-average pooled features) with a custom head (Dropout(p=0.1) ->
Linear(feat_dim, 2)). Trained with AdamW, lr = 1e-4, weight_decay = 1e-4,
CosineAnnealingLR, mixed precision, gradient clipping at 1.0.

4.1 Original (Phase 1) result -- discarded

An initial pipeline using construction-based labels reported 1.0 accuracy.
This was diagnosed as a format/label leak (the model was learning which
code branch produced the file, not removal residue) and discarded; it is
not reported as a result of this project.

4.2 Honest single-attack baseline

After fixing the label leak with verification-based labeling (Section 3.2)
but before diversifying the attack pipeline, a baseline was trained on a
dataset watermarked at alpha = 0.1 and attacked with a single generic
pixel-domain distortion pipeline (JPEG re-compression, Gaussian noise,
blur, resize, applied in randomized combination). Test result: accuracy
0.800, AUROC 0.888. This is the reference point against which the
diversified-attack-pipeline result (Section 5) is compared.


5. RESULTS ON THE DIVERSIFIED ATTACK PIPELINE (900-IMAGE CORPUS)

5.1 First trained model and an infrastructure confound

Training the diversified-attack dataset (Section 3) under the baseline's
original hyperparameters (batch_size=16) stalled repeatedly due to host
memory pressure (8GB RAM system, ~36MB free at stall time, confirmed via
vm_stat/memory_pressure -- not a code bug). Per project convention, this
was fixed transparently rather than silently worked around: batch_size was
reduced 16 -> 8 for this run (all other hyperparameters unchanged), and
flagged explicitly as an uncontrolled variable pending isolation (Section
5.2). Result: accuracy 0.607, AUROC 0.674 (vs. the 0.888 single-attack
baseline), precision 0.791, recall 0.541, F1 0.642.

5.2 Isolating the batch-size confound

To determine whether the ~0.21 AUROC drop was attributable to the new,
more diverse attack mix or to the batch-size change, we retrained with
gradient accumulation (batch_size=8, grad_accum_steps=2, effective batch
size 16, matching the original baseline) while holding every other
hyperparameter fixed. A first attempt at the original epoch/patience budget
(epochs=12, patience=5) collapsed to a degenerate always-predict-"removed"
classifier (stuck at the validation majority-class rate from epoch 1
onward) -- diagnosed as a genuine step-count sensitivity (accumulation
halves the number of optimizer steps per epoch), not evidence about
attack-mix difficulty, and reported as such rather than treated as the
resolving comparison.

A second attempt with a 3x larger epoch/patience budget (epochs=36,
patience=15, chosen to roughly match the first run's total optimizer-step
count with margin) converged properly: validation accuracy broke out to
0.6333 at epoch 4 and never regressed to the collapse signature; training
early-stopped at epoch 19. This is the model referred to throughout the
rest of this report as the "converged, budget-matched model"
(checkpoints_v2_accum_long/best_model.pt).

Test result: accuracy 0.6733, AUROC 0.6615, precision 0.7025, recall
0.8673, F1 0.7763 -- within 0.012 AUROC of the batch=8 run (0.674 vs.
0.662), against a ~0.21-0.22 AUROC gap from the 0.888 single-attack
baseline. Two independently-converged models at two different batch-size
settings landing this close together is read as strong evidence that
batch size was not the dominant driver of the AUROC drop -- the more
diverse, harder attack mix is.

5.3 Standalone evaluation of the converged model (full metrics)

[Historical record of the original MPS-trained run. This checkpoint was
subsequently lost from disk; a 2026-10-04 CUDA retrain could not reproduce
these exact figures -- see Section 5.3.1 for the current, 3-seed result
and for what is and is not still valid about the analysis below.]

Full breakdown for checkpoints_v2_accum_long/best_model.pt on the 150-image
test set (results/best_model_report/):

  Metric                                   Value
  Accuracy                                 0.6733
  AUROC                                    0.6615
  Precision                                0.7025
  Recall                                   0.8673
  F1                                       0.7763
  TPR @ 1.92% FPR (nearest achievable to
    both the 1% and 0.1% targets)          0.1735

The 1.92% figure is not a rounding choice: with only 52 negative ("present")
test examples, the empirical ROC curve's false-positive rate only takes
discrete steps of 1/52 (~1.92%); there is no real operating point at
exactly 1% or 0.1% FPR. We report the nearest achievable FPR at or above
the requested target rather than interpolating between two real points,
since interpolation on 52 negatives would imply a precision the sample
size does not support. Both the 1% and 0.1% targets happen to fall in the
same gap below this test set's first nonzero ROC step and therefore
resolve to the same operating point.

Confusion matrix (rows = true label, columns = predicted label):

                  Pred: Present   Pred: Removed
  True: Present        16              36
  True: Removed        13              85

This surfaces an explicit bias not visible from the pooled metrics alone:
of 52 true "Present" images, only 16 (31%) are correctly identified as
still watermarked; the remaining 36 (69%) are misclassified as "Removed."
At this decision threshold, the model is substantially better at
confirming a removal occurred than at confirming a watermark is still
intact -- an asymmetry any downstream use of this classifier (e.g. as a
removal-detection alarm) needs to account for explicitly, not one that
should be summarized away by the pooled accuracy/AUROC figures.

5.3.1 Update (2026-10-04): 3-seed CUDA retrain, and a hardware-dependent
      reproducibility finding

Preparing this draft for submission required reloading
checkpoints_v2_accum_long/best_model.pt, which turned out not to exist on
disk (gitignored, and not regenerated since the 5.3 run). Retraining from
the committed config (configs/v2_accum_long.yaml, seed=42, otherwise
unchanged) on this machine's CUDA GPU (RTX 3050) did not reproduce the 5.3
numbers. Investigating why surfaced two compounding factors rather than a
single bug:

  (a) results/v2_accum_long/CHECKPOINT_REFERENCE.md records that the
      original 5.3 run was trained on MPS (Apple Silicon), not CUDA, and
      already flagged -- before this issue was found -- that "exact
      byte-for-byte reproduction is not guaranteed" across backends.
  (b) The watermark is deliberately weak (alpha=0.02, Section 5.6) with
      many images sitting close to the verify() correlation threshold
      (0.5); small cross-backend floating-point differences in the
      DWT/DCT/SVD embedding and the DC-AE regeneration attack (both
      ordinary floating-point numerics, not stochastic sampling --
      confirmed by reading src/attacks/diffusion_regen.py, which uses
      @torch.no_grad() deterministic encode/decode with no random
      generator) are enough to flip some of those borderline verify()
      outcomes, changing which images land in which class when the
      dataset-build step is rerun on different hardware.

The practical result: data/watermarked_v2 and data/removed_v2 on disk
today (298 present / 602 removed) do not match the 399/501 split reported
in Section 3.2, because the dataset itself was rebuilt on this machine at
some point after the original MPS run. This is reported as a genuine,
previously-undocumented reproducibility limitation of this pipeline, not
patched over: a "fixed seed" in scripts/build_verified_dataset.py
guarantees the same attack-family *assignment* per image across reruns,
but not the same *verify() outcome* for every image, when the rerun
happens on different numerical hardware and the embedding is this close to
its detection threshold. We did not attempt to fix this within the current
scope (see Section 8); doing so would likely require either a stronger,
less borderline watermark (larger alpha) or deterministic-mode flags across
every numeric library in the pipeline, neither of which is a small change.

Given this, we adopt the current, CUDA-trained, verification-labeled
dataset (data/splits_v2 as it exists on disk at submission time; zero
group leakage re-verified, leak_check_report.md) as the dataset of record
going forward, and report a 3-seed retrain on it rather than a single run,
directly addressing the single-seed-only limitation flagged in this
project's own workplan:

  Seed    Accuracy   AUROC    Precision   Recall   F1
  42      0.7333     0.7704   0.7632      0.8700   0.8131
  1       0.7600     0.7694   0.8137      0.8300   0.8218
  2       0.6933     0.7498   0.7812      0.7500   0.7653
  Mean    0.7289     0.7632   0.7860      0.8167   0.8001
  Std     0.0336     0.0116   0.0256      0.0611   0.0304

(scripts/aggregate_seed_metrics.py; per-seed checkpoints
checkpoints_v2_accum_long{,_seed1,_seed2}/best_model.pt; test set n=150,
50 negative / 100 positive on the current splits_v2.)

AUROC is notably stable across seeds (std 0.012) despite the hardware/
dataset discontinuity from the original 5.3 run -- the 3-seed mean (0.763)
is higher than the original single-run figure (0.662), not lower, so this
update does not weaken the paper's core claim that the classifier carries
real signal (Section 5.8 baseline comparison, re-run against this same
current dataset, still shows a large gap over non-learned and
non-finetuned baselines). The present-class miss-rate bias flagged in the
original 5.3 (intact watermarks misclassified as "removed") replicates in
direction across all 3 seeds but varies in magnitude (seed 42: 27/50 = 54%
misclassified; seed 1: 19/50 = 38%; seed 2: 21/50 = 42%) -- consistently
present, not a stable 69% figure specific to the lost checkpoint.

Sections 5.2 and 5.4 below report analyses performed on the original
MPS-trained run and its data; they remain internally valid as comparisons
between runs made on that same original hardware/dataset, but their
absolute AUROC figures (0.662, 0.674, and the per-family numbers in 5.4)
should not be read as hardware-independent constants in light of this
finding. We have not re-run the batch-size-confound isolation (5.2) or the
per-attack-family breakdown (5.4) on the current CUDA dataset; doing so is
listed in Section 8.


5.4 Per-attack-family breakdown

  Metric       distortion-optimization (n=83)   SANA-VAE (n=67)
                 n_present=9, n_removed=74         n_present=43, n_removed=24
  Precision    0.9437                            0.3600
  Recall       0.9054                            0.7500
  F1           0.9241                            0.4865
  AUROC        0.7688                            0.6483
  Accuracy     0.8675                            0.4328

The model is substantially stronger against distortion-optimization-
attacked images than against SANA-VAE-attacked images. This ordering was
unstable in the earlier, degenerate grad-accumulation run (Section 5.2) but
is consistent across both properly-converged models (batch=8: 0.733 vs.
0.672; converged/budget-matched: 0.7688 vs. 0.6483), which we read as a
reasonably trustworthy finding that SANA-VAE-style regeneration is the
harder attack family for this classifier to detect, not an artifact of the
earlier confound.

Caveat: distortion-optimization's present class in this subset has only
n=9 examples. Its precision/recall/F1/AUROC above are high-variance as a
result and should be read as a rough, noisy signal from this one test
split, not a confident, stable per-family measurement.

5.5 Task 1 control comparison (Gap-2-adjacent, unresolved)

A separate, frozen-classifier control comparison scores the model on
verified-removed test images against a matched-severity, never-watermarked
control corpus (Section 3.4), to check whether the classifier's signal is
specific to removal residue rather than generic edit artifacts. AUROC on
this comparison across the three training runs described above:

  Run                                          Task 1 control AUROC
  Original (single-attack baseline lineage)    0.6718
  batch=8 (Section 5.1)                        0.6107
  Converged, budget-matched (Section 5.2)      0.5712

This is the one result in this project that does not fit a clean
narrative: the properly-converged, budget-matched model -- the one we have
the most confidence is not confounded by batch size or training collapse
-- scores lower on this control comparison than either earlier run,
continuing a downward trend rather than recovering toward the original
0.6718 reference. A plausible but unconfirmed reading is that the longer
training budget let the model fit the main present-vs-removed decision
boundary well without necessarily learning the more subtle removal-residue
signal this control isolates. This is reported as an open question, not
investigated further within the current scope.

5.6 Embedding fragility (inference-demo observation)

A qualitative inference demo run over real test-set examples
(results/inference_demo/) surfaced that at least one source image
(data/raw/0300.png) embeds the watermark only weakly at alpha = 0.02: its
verify() correlation immediately after embedding, before any attack is
applied, is 0.525 -- barely above the 0.5 presence threshold. This means
some fraction of "removed" labels in the dataset may reflect weak initial
embedding rather than attack efficacy, a source of label noise independent
of attack strength that is not currently quantified across the full
corpus.

5.7 Three-class extension (Present / Removed / Original)

A separate model (checkpoints_3class/best_model.pt, configs/3class.yaml)
was trained on a three-way extension of the same task, adding a third
"Original" class (pristine, never-watermarked DIV2K images) alongside
Present and Removed. Pooled macro-averaged metrics on the 300-image test
split: accuracy 0.8167, AUROC (macro, one-vs-rest) 0.9136.

These pooled numbers are not directly comparable to Section 5.3's
present-vs-removed result and should not be read as an improvement over
it. The confusion matrix shows the Original class is classified at 95.3%
(143/150) -- pristine, unprocessed images are trivially separable from
anything that has been through the watermark-embed-and-attack pipeline,
regardless of whether a watermark survived. With Original samples making
up half the 300-image test set, this easy third bucket inflates the
pooled macro accuracy and AUROC well above what the model achieves on the
actual forensic question.

Isolating the present-vs-removed subset (150 samples: 49 present, 101
removed) and renormalizing each prediction's score as P(removed) /
(P(present) + P(removed)) to exclude the Original probability mass gives:
accuracy 0.7467, AUROC 0.7929, precision 0.8000, recall 0.8317, F1
0.8155 (confusion matrix [[28, 21], [17, 84]], rows/cols =
true/pred present, removed). This was the honest like-for-like comparison
to Section 5.3's original 0.6733 accuracy / 0.6615 AUROC, on a different
(and not directly attack-matched) dataset variant, not a pooled-metric
artifact. Note (2026-10-04): Section 5.3's headline has since been
updated to a 3-seed 0.7289/0.7632 (Section 5.3.1), which narrows this
comparison's apparent improvement considerably; this 3-class model was not
re-run on the current dataset, so the two numbers are not freshly
comparable -- re-running it is listed in Section 8.


5.8 Baseline comparison (non-finetuned and non-learned baselines)

[Run 2026-10-04 against the current, CUDA-era data/splits_v2 -- the same
dataset underlying the 5.3.1 retrain, not the original/lost 5.3 run. The
comparison below is against the 5.3.1 3-seed headline for this reason.]

To check that the ConvNeXt-Tiny headline result (Section 5.3.1: 3-seed
mean accuracy 0.7289, AUROC 0.7632) reflects a real, learned forensic
signal rather than being achievable by a trivial classifier or a
hand-crafted image-quality heuristic, we ran three baselines on the
identical data/splits_v2 test set (experiments/exp1_baseline_repro/
baseline_check.py; seed-42 checkpoint used for the ConvNeXt-Tiny row
since baseline_check.py is a single-run comparator, not seed-averaged):

  Baseline                          Test accuracy   Test AUROC
  2-layer CNN (trained)             0.6667          0.4420
  Laplacian-variance threshold      0.6600          0.5204
  JPEG-blockiness threshold         0.6600          0.5876
  ConvNeXt-Tiny (headline, seed 42) 0.7333          0.7704
  ConvNeXt-Tiny (headline, 3-seed mean, 5.3.1) --    0.7632

The 2-layer CNN (Option A: two conv+pool blocks, trained with the same
AdamW recipe and early stopping as the headline model) collapsed to a
constant majority-class prediction after epoch 1 -- its val accuracy
(0.6733) exactly matches the val split's majority-class rate, and it never
moved for the remaining 5 epochs before early stopping triggered. Its test
AUROC of 0.4420 is below 0.5, meaning its soft probability output
*anti-ranks* relative to the true labels; this is a degenerate baseline,
not a competitive one, and is reported as such rather than smoothed over.
The two non-learned heuristics (a single fixed threshold on Laplacian-filter
variance or JPEG block-boundary strength, swept to find each metric's own
best-case threshold on each split) do slightly better than chance
(AUROC 0.52-0.59) but far short of the ConvNeXt-Tiny result, and their
headline "accuracy" figures are inflated by the same majority-class
baseline the 2-layer CNN collapsed to (0.66-0.67 accuracy is achievable by
always predicting "removed" on this 50/100-skewed test set; AUROC, not
accuracy, is the metric that actually distinguishes these baselines from
the headline model here).

This comparison supports reading the ConvNeXt-Tiny headline as a real,
non-trivial forensic signal -- it is not matched by a smaller trained
network under an identical training recipe, nor by two standard low-level
image-quality heuristics -- while also making explicit that none of these
baselines, including the headline model, clears a high bar in absolute
terms on this task.


6. GAP 1: REAL-WORLD TOOL EVALUATION (UNRESOLVED)

Gap 1 asks whether the trained classifier retains any skill against a
watermark-removal tool it never saw during training -- specifically, a
tool built and released independently of this project, as opposed to one
of the attack-family building blocks (Section 3) used to construct the
training data itself. This section is the only Gap 1 evidence in this
report; everything in Sections 3-5 concerns Module 2 (synthetic training
data construction) and should not be conflated with it.

6.1 released UnMarker tool (andrekassis/ai-watermark)

Disqualified: no CPU/MPS execution path (torch pinned to cu121-only), a
~30GB download (ten bundled, scheme-specific detector models), and an
interface built around selecting one of those ten known schemes rather
than accepting an arbitrary image and watermark. This is why Section 3.1's
distortion-optimization attack is a project-original, UnMarker-inspired
reimplementation rather than the released tool itself.

6.2 remove-ai-watermarks (github.com/wiltodelta/remove-ai-watermarks)

Independently verified to be a real, actively-used community tool (5,624
GitHub stars at time of check, Apache-2.0, published on PyPI) before
attempting integration. Both of its invisible-watermark-removal code paths
were traced to source and disqualified:

  (a) the diffusion-regeneration path (a Qwen z-image pipeline) calls
      self._require_cuda() directly, with its own docstring stating "ALL
      ARE CUDA-ONLY -- there is no CPU or MPS path"; this development
      machine has no CUDA GPU.
  (b) the "direct local-format disruption" path is coupled specifically to
      Microsoft's proprietary InvisMark watermark declaration and would
      not recognize or meaningfully attack our custom DWT-DCT-SVD scheme
      at all.

No dataset was built and no classifier score exists for this tool; the
disqualification was reached from source-code inspection alone.

6.3 Synthid-Bypass (github.com/cebeuq/Synthid-Bypass)

Not hard CUDA-locked in its code (unlike 6.1 and 6.2), but assessed as
impractical under this project's time and infrastructure budget: measured
model downloads of at least 29.78GB, plus one additional file on a
gated HuggingFace repository that could not even be sized without approved
access; a full ComfyUI installation plus seven separate custom-node
repositories as dependencies; and no single-image command-line interface.
A deliberate decision was made not to proceed, given the disproportionate
setup cost relative to the remaining evaluation scope and time available.

6.4 Status

Gap 1 remains unresolved: zero real-world removal-tool evidence has been
obtained to date. All four candidates investigated above were evaluated on
this project's compute constraints at the time (CPU/MPS-only, no CUDA GPU)
and were either hard-blocked by a GPU-only code path, structurally coupled
to a different watermark scheme than ours, or impractically large/complex
to stand up within scope. This is reported here as the actual state of the
work, not smoothed into an implied completion. The TPR@low-FPR reporting
fix in Section 5.3 was added to src/evaluate.py in anticipation of
eventually scoring a real-tool-attacked subset, but no such subset
currently exists.

Update (2026-10-04): this project has since moved to a CUDA-capable
machine (RTX 3050, 6GB), which removes the single blocker behind the
remove-ai-watermarks diffusion-regeneration disqualification (6.2a) and
reopens DiffPure and the released UnMarker tool as candidates whose
earlier disqualification (6.1, 6.2) was specifically a CPU/MPS-only
finding. A renewed attempt at remove-ai-watermarks' Qwen-based path was
started but not completed -- it stalled mid-download (the model's
transformer weights ship as nine separate ~5GB shards) and has not yet
been resumed to a result. Gap 1 is therefore still unresolved, but the
reason has changed: it is now a time/bandwidth constraint on this attempt,
not a hard compute-capability block, and resuming it is lower-effort than
when Section 6.1-6.3 were written.


7. LIMITATIONS

  - Test set size (n=150; 52 negatives on the original Section 5.3 run,
    50 on the current Section 5.3.1 dataset) limits the resolution of
    low-FPR operating-point claims and per-attack-family metrics (Section
    5.3, 5.4); several reported numbers are explicitly flagged as high-variance
    rather than presented as precise.
  - Gap 1 is unresolved (Section 6): all reported classifier skill is
    measured only against the project's own attack-family reimplementations,
    not an independently-built removal tool. No claim of real-world
    generalization can currently be made.
  - The Task 1 control result (Section 5.5) is an open, unexplained trend,
    not a settled finding about removal-residue specificity (Gap 2).
  - CtrlRegen (Section 3.3), while technically integrated, ships without a
    LICENSE file in its source repository, which we treat as a
    reproducibility/redistribution flag rather than resolving it here.
  - Compute in this project was CPU/MPS-only through Section 6's original
    writing; several disqualifications there are a direct function of that
    constraint. A CUDA machine has since become available (Section 6.4
    update) but the renewed Gap 1 attempt this enables is not yet complete.
  - The dataset-build pipeline (scripts/build_verified_dataset.py) is not
    reproducible across hardware backends despite its --seed flag: Section
    5.3.1 found that moving from MPS to CUDA changed which borderline
    images verify as watermark-present vs. removed, changing the realized
    class balance and downstream headline metrics. Numbers in Sections 5.2
    and 5.4 are specific to the original MPS run and have not been
    re-verified on CUDA.


8. FUTURE WORK

  - Continue Gap 1 now that CUDA is available (this project moved to a
    CUDA-capable machine, RTX 3050 6GB, after Section 6 was written on a
    CPU/MPS-only one): DiffPure, the released UnMarker tool,
    remove-ai-watermarks' diffusion-regeneration path, and Synthid-Bypass
    should be re-attempted against this hardware rather than left
    disqualified on constraints that no longer apply.
  - Re-run the batch-size-confound isolation (5.2), per-attack-family
    breakdown (5.4), and 3-class extension (5.7) on the current
    CUDA-trained dataset/checkpoints, since Section 5.3.1 found those
    sections' absolute figures are specific to the original (now
    unreproducible) MPS run.
  - Fix the cross-backend dataset-build reproducibility gap identified in
    Section 5.3.1 -- either by strengthening the watermark (larger alpha,
    away from the borderline-threshold regime) or by enforcing
    deterministic-mode numerics across the embedding and regeneration-attack
    code paths -- before relying on scripts/build_verified_dataset.py's
    --seed flag as a guarantee of a reproducible dataset across machines.
  - Expand the test set (currently n=150) to tighten the low-FPR operating
    points and per-attack-family confidence intervals flagged in Sections
    5.3-5.4.
  - Investigate the declining Task 1 control AUROC trend (Section 5.5)
    directly -- e.g. by training with an auxiliary Task-1-style objective,
    or by decomposing the trend across training-budget length independent
    of the batch-size change already ruled out.
  - Quantify weak-embedding label noise (Section 5.6) across the full
    corpus, not just the single example surfaced during the inference demo.
  - Resolve or replace CtrlRegen's licensing gap before any external
    release of derived artifacts.


REFERENCES

Tools and attack families evaluated/implemented in this project (Section 3):

  Nie, W. et al. "Diffusion Models for Adversarial Purification." ICML 2022.
    (DiffPure)
  Xie, E. et al. "SANA: Efficient High-Resolution Image Synthesis with
    Linear Diffusion Transformers." ICLR 2025 (Oral). (SANA-VAE / DC-AE)
  Liu, Y. et al. "CtrlRegen: ..." arXiv:2410.05470.
  Soucek, T. et al. NeurIPS 2025 (Spotlight). (WMForger)
  Kassis, A. and Hengartner, U. "UnMarker: A Universal Attack on Defensive
    Image Watermarking." IEEE S&P 2025.

Related work (Section 1.1) -- watermark embedding, removal, and forensic
detection literature situating this project:

  Lai, C.-C. and Tsai, C.-C. "Digital Image Watermarking Using Discrete
    Wavelet Transform and Singular Value Decomposition." IEEE Transactions
    on Instrumentation and Measurement, 59(11):3060-3063, 2010.
  Fernandez, P., Couairon, G., Jegou, H., Douze, M., and Furon, T. "The
    Stable Signature: Rooting Watermarks in Latent Diffusion Models." ICCV
    2023, pp. 22466-22477.
  Wen, Y., Kirchenbauer, J., Geiping, J., and Goldstein, T. "Tree-Ring
    Watermarks: Fingerprints for Diffusion Images that are Invisible and
    Robust." NeurIPS 2023.
  Zhao, X., Zhang, K., Su, Z., Vasan, S., Grishchenko, I., Kruegel, C.,
    Vigna, G., Wang, Y.-X., and Li, L. "Invisible Image Watermarks Are
    Provably Removable Using Generative AI." arXiv:2306.01953 (2023);
    NeurIPS 2024.
  An, B., Ding, M., Rabbani, T., Agrawal, A., Xu, Y., Deng, C., Zhu, S.,
    Mohamed, A., Wen, Y., Goldstein, T., and Huang, F. "WAVES: Benchmarking
    the Robustness of Image Watermarks." ICML 2024.
  Wang, S.-Y., Wang, O., Zhang, R., Owens, A., and Efros, A. A.
    "CNN-Generated Images Are Surprisingly Easy to Spot... for Now." CVPR
    2020, pp. 8695-8704.
  Corvi, R., Cozzolino, D., Zingarini, G., Poggi, G., Nagano, K., and
    Verdoliva, L. "On the Detection of Synthetic Images Generated by
    Diffusion Models." ICASSP 2023, pp. 1-5.
  Ojha, U., Li, Y., and Lee, Y. J. "Towards Universal Fake Image Detectors
    That Generalize Across Generative Models." CVPR 2023, pp. 24480-24489.


ARTIFACTS AND REPRODUCIBILITY

  Watermarking / dataset construction : src/watermark/embed.py,
                                         scripts/build_verified_dataset.py
  Attack implementations              : src/attacks/{distortion,
                                         distortion_optimization,
                                         diffusion_regen,
                                         regeneration_ctrlregen}.py
  Splits (group-aware, leak-checked)  : data/splits_v2/, src/data/build_splits.py
  Classifier / training               : src/models/classifier.py,
                                         src/train.py,
                                         configs/v2_accum_long.yaml
  Best checkpoint                     : checkpoints_v2_accum_long/best_model.pt
  Standalone best-model report        : results/best_model_report/
                                         (report.md, report.json, figures)
  Per-attack-family analysis          : results/attack_breakdown/ANALYSIS.md
  Qualitative inference demo          : results/inference_demo/
  Baseline comparison (Section 5.8)   : experiments/exp1_baseline_repro/baseline_check.py,
                                         experiments/exp1_baseline_repro/baseline_results_v2.json
  Gap 1 tool evaluation log           : phase2_tools_evaluation.md
                                         (section "Gap 1: Real-Tool Evaluation")
  Mechanism / publication figures     : results/figures/, results/figures/mechanism/

Dataset build command (full 900-image corpus, as run):
  python -m scripts.build_verified_dataset --raw data/raw \
    --out-present data/watermarked_v2 --out-removed data/removed_v2 \
    --save-quality 80 --alpha 0.02

Evaluation command (converged best model):
  python -m src.evaluate --config configs/v2_accum_long.yaml \
    --checkpoint checkpoints_v2_accum_long/best_model.pt --split test
